---
layout: post
title: "Critique Blog: First Day Struggles at DBC"
quote: Encountering the DBC culture and my own internal habits.
image: /media/critique-blogs/WaterDrops_16.jpg
video: false
---

#Day 1 of DBC

Holler. It was quite a day yesterday. I knew that I would have to get through the first week and then hopefully regroup that next weekend to put a new plan in place for success and general well being throughout the intense, long days that one experiences at DBC. My experience wasn't bad necessarily, but it wasn't good either. I think that what I found is artifacts from being in an educational paradigm that now seems to be made up in the mind of people who are afraid of loosing their position in the world and don't want to work hard. College. You pay so much money for learning something that isn't actually what you will be doing after college in an objective sense. They would probably agree. They say that they are teaching you to be a well rounded person and how to be a critical thinker. Great. We will come back to this in a second. 

The artifacts that I found from being a student in the factory for so long were the jumping through hoops artifact and the checking off a box artifact. Because you won't be tested after college on the things you learned in college, there isn't an internal stimulus that is motivating you to learn. I personally adopted the mindset of getting the tasks accomplished with the least work. It was pretty simple, I became good at college without learning. I learned how to not learn but submit a paper that would pass the rigors and expectations of those college authorities.

Day 1 at college = students ask "how do I get an A in this class?" The teachers would usually tell you. This always seemed strange to me, but I was a bit too sleepy to really get upset about it. We should be here to learn I vaguely thought. I had a mid college renaissance and I began thinking about what I wanted to learn and knew that I had to take control of my learning experience to make it worthwhile because nobody else was. However, there is an expectation because of how the degree system is set up that you are paying a ton of money, and that it will do something for you. Education should never be set up so that you think it will passively do something to you. Education only works with the radical people who don't expect anything out of it but make everything from it. 

I couldn't help but think of a boss that I used to have who ran 3 great businesses. He always talked about frameworks drive success internally. If you pay by the hour, there is no motivation to be effecient and excellent in your work. However, if there are motivations for speediness and quality of work where people can advance based on those two factors, you now have an internal system that motives a successfull business. Managers spend less time managing people because they are internally motivated for the right things. 

DBC operates on this framework and college does not. I have seen many articles blasting DBC or the bootcamp model of education. It won't work. It sucks. But think about it. With this lack of being established, my success is their success. When I go out into the world and say that I did DBC, I am now the most direct advertisement they will have to become a successful educational experience. They are motivated to make sure I actually learn and so you have an interative model. What is working? What isn't? Let's change that for the next group of students that will be here in 3 weeks. The thigns that aren't working go and what is rocking people's worlds stays. What you end up with is a program that is constantly changing but where 80% of what is happening is really, really valuable whereas in college about 5% of what happens is really, really valuable.

In college, you get a degree when you are done. There is surely the same effect of graduates being an advertisement for their college, but the college paradigm of eduction is so established that they don't have to work very hard to stay afloat. That is not a model that provides internal motivation for success. There are classes that are a waste of time. There are teachers that continue to give the same lectures. They don't change iteratively. They aren't internally motivated to create an incredible experience for their students. They become lazy. Why wouldn't you? 

At DBC, I feel cared for, and I see how what I learn really matters to all the staff at DBC. It is wholly different than the college learning experience. However, my artifacts are tripping me up. I finished the day's goals, but there were times that I took shortcuts because I was panicking that I wouldn't finish. However, at the end of the day, I knew that it didn't matter whether or not I finished the goals in some sense. All I have when I am done is my own noggin. When you finish college, you get a degree and placing that on a resume makes you feel legit. However, the main thing you get after DBC is the what you have learned and hopefully a greater capacity to learn. 

Coming in to day 2, I want to remember that it literally is meaningless for me to accomplish tasks without understanding what I am doing. Wow. It is like I am 10 years old again, and I love learning. What a waste of time I spent learning how to give professors what they wanted from me without actually taking control of my learning. I don't blame colleges. I don't think they need to be wholly abolished. I value my college experience. I could have taken more control of it and learned more, but I can't help but be keenly aware of how the model as a whole does not promote community and the interconnectdness of teacher and student. The teachers at DBC need its students at DBC to be actually learning and not finding how to jump through the monkey bars of its curriculum. The curriculum is given to help a learning experience. The point is to not beat the curriculum but let it guide you and draw out the little child inside that just fucking loves to learn.

