---
layout: post
title: "Thoughts Blog: Second Day at DBC Reflections"
quote: Encountering my compulsion to control.
image: /media/thought-blogs/VintagePath_13.jpg
video: false
---

#Day 2 at DBC

I was rolling around in bed and couldn't stop thinking about the day. I figured I better come wrestle with some thoughts and defeat them so I can let them be. This season has felt really overwhelming. I remember when I first had the idea to do Dev Bootcamp back in March of this year. I thought to myself about all the things I needed to get done before that could happen. I needed to contribute as a parent to my 5 month old daughter. I needed to train 2 people to replace me in my job and find those people myself. I needed to sell my house and try to not loose a bunch of money. I needed to move all of my stuff from Chicago to Montana. I needed to keep up with DBC phase 0 homework while doing all of this. I needed to come back to Chicago and spend long weeks on the road, finishing my work commitments while keepoing up with DBC homework. I needed to go back to Montana and have 4 days with my daughter whom I miss insanely. 

In the midst of all these things, I have personally been more stretched in this season than any time I can remember. You know what though? Everything has turned out fine, and the things that weren't fine, I got through them. The result though from being overwhelmed can be trying to control things to cope with the multitude of emotions. Leaving close friends. Leaving a great job. Moving to Montana. Getting back in the student mode. These things stir up a lot. I found myself buying a personal planner and creating long lists. These eased the pain. For a little bit. Then I would get a wave of feeling overwhelmed. I would try putting everything into a list, but it wasn't as satisfying. It's like getting high. The first time is the best. The more you get high, the less it really "does the job." The other imbalance of trying to control things is that you start trying to control things that cannot be controlled. That is when you really get into psychologically troubled waters and might need a counselor if you don't get out of that ship. 

While I was tossing in bed tonight, I had the thought that this process can be summed up with an abstract truth. One can only be a passive receiver of the present moment but an active translator. If one tries to be an active receiver of the present moment, this gets hairy and can be emotionally confusing. 

Again, that is abstract so let me take you into my day. Things were going pretty well. I was in a zone of focus and learning. It was great and productive. Then, as I was looking towards projects later in the week, I read something that was supposed to be motivating in relation to pursuing an "upper bar" above the core challenges we need to accomplish daily. I have been staying on track to get my daily challenges done with effort, and then I read that I should do better because previous students wrote their own gem and created sweet projects on the side during phase 1. Granted, I am only 2 days in, but I became agitated internally. I think that the panic came from the fact that I was trying to be an active receiver of the present moment. I was taking in what was happening and then trying to control it. 

I was thinking how being a passive receiver of the present moment would allow me to recognize my desire to do more than the minimum requirements at DBC. Through translation of this moment, I could then put out the notion that if an idea or opportunity arises to tackle some sort of nifty side project or challenge, I am interested in doing that out of genuine desire. The problem with trying to be an active receiver of the moment is that what ends up motivating you to do something is probably fear. When you think you can control things in ways that you can't, it makes the world a pretty fearful place when something you thought you were in control of doesn't act the way it ought. I really love the idea of practicing passive receiving and active interpreting so that I am not letting fear control my educational process. 

Habits dominate our lives. There is an infinite amount of data being presented at even the simplest of life's moments, and we allow habits and stereotypes to help guide us in surviving the earth as a fragile human. We can only focus on so much, and I want to focus on things that help me live a more surrendered life while actively striving towards my healthiest inner desires. I see that I am passionate about programming, and I want to do my best to keep fear out of my process by passively receiving the present moment recognizing my lack of control in many things.